A Novel Architecture for Cyber-Resilient
Self-Protecting Systems Based on Blockchain
Tommaso Caiazzi∗ , Stefano Iannucci∗ , Valerio Marini∗ , Diego Pennino† , Maurizio Pizzonia∗ , Riccardo Torlone∗
∗ Roma Tre University, † University of Tuscia

Abstract—Self-Protecting Systems (SPS) rely on an autonomic
manager to detect and mitigate cyber threats. However, a major
challenge in SPS design is ensuring the security of the autonomic
manager itself, as its compromise could lead to complete control
of the system by an attacker. In this work, we propose a cyberresilient SPS architecture that leverages permissioned blockchain
technology to enhance the trustworthiness of both Intrusion
Detection (ID) and Intrusion Response (IR). The proposed
architecture is technology-agnostic and adaptable to various ID
and IR techniques. We implement a prototype using Quorum
and a smart contract and evaluate its performance in terms
of overhead and scalability. Experimental results show that the
proposed architecture is technically feasible and that it introduces
a minimal overhead with respect to non-smart contract-based
transactions, and that it can be used on production systems with
high event rates despite the inherent scalability issues deriving
from the usage of the chosen blockchain technology.
Index Terms—Self-Protecting Systems, Blockchain, Intrusion
Detection, Intrusion Response

I. I NTRODUCTION
Self-Protecting Systems (SPS) are typically architected with
two macro-components, namely: a managed system and an
autonomic manager [1]. The former is the production system,
while the latter is a controller that is in charge of detecting
and possibly executing defense actions should the managed
system found to be compromised. In particular, the autonomic
manager of a SPS usually relies on a pipeline of two macrocomponents, namely: one or more Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS), in charge of detecting possible attacks directed to the
managed system; and one or more Intrusion Response Systems
(IRS), in charge of selecting the appropriate response to be
executed to counter or mitigate it.
However, one of the most important critiques that is usually
moved against SPSs is the possibility for the autonomic
manager itself to be attacked, thus allowing the attacker
complete control over the production system. This issue was
already envisioned by Chess et al. [2] when, in a seminal
work regarding cybersecurity for autonomic systems, on the
one hand, they highlighted the benefits that the autonomic
computing paradigm could have on system security; on the
other hand, they discussed some emergent security issues
introducing the need for trustworthy autonomic managers.
Designing a cyber-resilient autonomic manager is still an
open challenge, as also highlighted in more recent works [3],
[4]. For this reason, in this paper, we investigate the design
of an architecture for cyber-resilient SPSs. In particular, we
focus on the need for trustworthy detection of cyber-attacks
and trustworthy selection of response actions. To this end, we

employ a permissioned blockchain technology (i) to keep track
of the events generated by the IDSs and achieve consensus
on the actual state of the system (i.e., whether or not the
system is under attack); and (ii) to keep track of the response
action proposals and achieve consensus on which one has
to be executed to counter the detected attack. Using this
strategy and a Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT [5]) consensus,
the autonomic manager can withstand the compromise of up
to 1/3 of the IDSs and up to 1/3 of the IRSs under the
assumptions and according to the threat model detailed in
Section II.
It is worth noting however that our proposed architecture is
independent of the specific blockchain technology, and from
the adopted IDS and IRS techniques. Indeed, for simplicity,
we realized an openly accessible instance of SPS prototype [6]
following our architecture using Quorum and the QBFT [7]
consensus algorithm, where events are synthetically generated
and responses are selected from a static state-action map.
The performance evaluation conducted using the prototype
shows that the overhead introduced by the intrusion response
smart contract is negligible. Moreover, it demonstrates the
applicability of the proposed approach even to systems with
large action maps. Finally, while on the one hand it highlights
potential scalability issues on the blockchain leader due to the
serialization of the Intrusion Detection events, on the other
hand it shows that the rate of sustainable events using a singleCPU Virtual Machine is high enough (nearly 500 events/sec)
for systems with high event rate generation.
The paper is organized as follows: the architecture model
and the threat model are described in Section II; the prototype
implementation is illustrated in Section III; experimental results are discussed in Section IV; in Section V related works
in the field of SPS and cyber-resilience are presented. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. M ODELS
In this section, we first describe our proposed architecture
and the role of the blockchain. Then, we describe our threat
model.
A. System Architecture Model
The proposed SPS architecture is represented in Figure 1.
We assume both the manager system and the managed system
to be made of several components that run in containers that
in turn are hosted in physical or virtual hosts. The isolation
provided by these containers is crucial to ensuring the security

Manager System
Blockchain
Smart Contract
Smart Contract State

s1

ax

sn

s3

s2

Response Logic

Sx

5

6

7

NodeM1

NodeM2

4

4

NodeAj

NodeMi

NodeA1

IDSi

Actuator1

8

IDS1

IDS2
3

Actuatorj

3
9

2

𝑣2

𝑣1

𝑣3

𝑣4

𝑣5

Monitored System State
Application2

Application1

𝑣𝑘−1

𝑣𝑘

Applicationn
Managed System

event

1

Fig. 1: The Proposed SPS Architecture

of our approach, as will become evident in Section II-B.
Components of the managed system are applications to be
controlled by the manager system, and hence, their containers
are named application containers. The application itself and
the containers it runs can be monitored with respect to several
aspects. In general, for each container, there are several state
variables (e.g., CPU usage, disk I/O) that change over time
and are monitored by the manager system. The set of all
the monitored variables is named monitored system state.
Referring to a collection of variables to identify the system
state is typical in the field of intrusion response, e.g., [8].
The manager system is made by IDSs, actuators, and a
blockchain made of several blockchain nodes. Each IDS, each
actuator and each blockchain node runs in its own container.
The blockchain and the actuators form the IRS, which is
part of the manager system. Each IDS and each actuator is
paired with its own blockchain node, which is used to interact
with the blockchain. Additional blockchain nodes may be
possibly present in the manager system to improve the overall
resiliency. In fact, the resiliency of a blockchain typically
depends on the number of component nodes.
The SPS architecture proposed in this work is independent
of the specific blockchain technology. However, it should have
the following characteristics. (i) It should be private and
permissioned so that we have full control over the identity
of nodes and their ability to join the network. (ii) It should
handle transactions quickly. (iii) It should provide the ability
to implement the response logic (described in the following)
in a smart contract.

A smart contract is a self-executing program deployed on a blockchain that automatically enforces predefined
rules and agreements between nodes, without the need for
intermediaries. Once deployed, smart contracts run deterministically across all nodes in the network, ensuring transparency,
trustlessness, and immutability of the encoded logic.
The blockchain leverages on a smart contract to keep a
so-called smart contract state that is shared among all the
IDSs and all the actuators. This state contains a version of the
monitored system state, created on the basis of information
provided by the IDSs, plus additional information on the
internal state of the IRS itself (e.g., whether a given response
has already been executed). The blockchain is also in charge
of applying a response logic to decide which response, if any,
should be acted by actuators. Each IDS monitors a subset of
the state variables and contributes to updating the shared view
of the monitored system state by sending regular blockchain
transactions. At a certain instant of time, IDSs may not agree
on the state, for example, because one of them was compromised or because they have different detection times. A shared
consistent view of the monitored system state is obtained by
a voting approach. For this reason, in our architecture, the
same variable is preferably monitored by more than one IDS
(ideally, at least three). Further, IDSs should be heterogeneous
regarding their technology (see Section II-B). A way to realize
the voting approach to reach a shared state and to safely
compute a response according to a response logic is to adopt a
smart contract. A smart contract is a software object running
in a blockchain, for which, the integrity of its state and
of its execution is guaranteed by the integrity properties of
the blockchain itself. Interactions with the smart contract are
performed by the IDS by transactions. In a transaction, an IDS
declares its view of one or more monitored state variables.
The smart contract decides when to update the shared system
state on the basis of the consensus on the current monitored
state, given the state updates received from the IDSs. When
the shared state changes, the smart contract applies a response
logic to select a possible response. This can be thought of as
a generic function of the state. In its simplest implementation,
supposing a state with the Markov property, i.e., a state that
contains all the needed information and the path that led to
the state is not relevant for future transitions, it is just a table
that maps states to actions. The result of the application of the
response logic is recorded in the smart contract state, making
clear to all the components of the system that the manager
system is responding in some way. This is useful for three
reasons: (i) actuators read directly from the smart contract
state if they have to actuate any response, (ii) the effect of the
response may be expected by IDSs, and (iii) response logic
itself may signal any unexpected behavior (e.g., an unapplied
response).
Changes in the smart contract state are known to all nodes
since accepted transactions are packed into blocks that are
broadcast to all blockchain nodes. Consequently, state changes
applied by the response logic can be used to trigger the
appropriate countermeasure. In this way, blockchain nodes

associated with actuators are informed about responses to
actuate through regular blockchain broadcast and can relay
them to actuators. For security reasons, we assume that the
actuators are blind, in the sense that they perform their task
without reading any state. Note that, this does not prevent them
from obtaining state-related information from an IDS through
the blockchain if needed. Figure 1 also shows the sequence of
events triggered by a change in the monitored system state. An
event 1 , either malicious or not, changes the system state 2 .
One or more IDSs 3 recognize them and send a transaction to
their blockchain node 4 containing the corresponding update
of the smart contract state. The smart contract accumulates and
changes the corresponding state variables in the smart contract
state 5 when the majority of IDSs asks for it. If the state
change requires an action according to the response logic 6 ,
a random actuator, chosen from those capable of performing
the required action, is assigned to execute it and the associated
node is notified 7 . Actuators 8 are notified through push
mechanisms, which are commonly supported by blockchain
technologies [9]. Actuators perform 9 their response action.
B. Threat Model
In this section, we describe our threat model.
The purpose of the SPS architecture described in Section II-A is twofold: (i) to provide detection and response
capabilities to enable automatic protection of the managed
system in case of attacks on the latter; (ii) to be resilient
to attacks against the autonomic manager itself.
While the first objective is common to any SPS, we focus
on the second one. From our point of view, a successful attack
is an attack on the autonomic manager that compromises the
correct behavior of the manager itself. More specifically, an
incorrect behavior of the manager is one of the following.
1) An attack is detected, but the response dictated by the
response logic is not executed.
2) An actuator performs certain actions that are not triggered
by detection, potentially going beyond what is typically
considered a response.
We now describe the capabilities of the attacker and the
assumptions on the security of the elements of our architecture.
We assume that the attacker cannot attack any (physical
or virtual) host directly. Further, an attacker cannot escape a
container to get into the host. This means that the only way
to attack a container is to attack any process already running
in the container using one of its input channels. We do not
make any security assumptions about application processes.
By attacking them, an attacker can get into an application
container.
Regarding the manager system, we assume all the communications among its containers to be well isolated so that they
do not receive any input besides those encompassed by the
presented architecture. In other words, the only components
that directly receive untrusted input are the IDSs. Coherently
with the above assumption, actuators were defined to be blind
in Section II-A. This means that an actuator cannot be directly
attacked from the application container intended to act upon.

Given these assumptions, any attack on the autonomic manager
must first attack an IDS from an application container.
Smart contracts may be vulnerable. There is a large literature about smart contracts vulnerabilities. For example, for the
solidity technology adopted in the implementation described
in Section III, they are surveyed in [10] and [11]. We assume
that the smart contract in the manager system is correctly and
securely realized.
To force the autonomic manager to behave incorrectly, the
attacker can adopt one of the following strategies.
1) provide wrong inputs to the response selection logic,
2) tamper with the execution of the selection by taking
control of the blockchain itself,
3) change the behavior of the actuators so that they do not
execute the correct response, do not execute anything, or
execute a completely unrelated action.
We will now briefly discuss the challenges an attacker faces
when pursuing each of the three strategies within the context
of our assumptions and architecture.
Regarding Strategy 1, the voting mechanism described in
Section II-A acts as a countermeasure against the compromise
of a single IDS. It forces the attacker to compromise the
majority of IDS containers. This is hard if each state variable
is monitored by at least three heterogeneous IDSs, where we
suppose that if the attacker can find a vulnerability in one of
them, the other two can still monitor and provide good inputs
to the selection logic correctly. Note also that, some IDSs
might perform monitoring only by getting inputs from outside
the container. This typically does not provide the attacker with
a viable channel to execute an attack, resulting in significantly
higher security.
Regarding Strategy 2, the consensus mechanism underlying
a blockchain acts as a countermeasure. This is usually a
Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT, [5]) consensus that is resilient
up to n/3 malicious nodes. However, to attack one blockchain
node, the attacker should first attack its corresponding IDS,
thus reaching this target may be very hard for the attacker.
Subversion of the blockchain might be achieved by the attacker
by spreading the attack through the whole blockchain network.
Special care should be taken to make this hard to achieve (for
example by adopting heterogeneous node implementations).
Further, additional nodes not connected to any IDSs can be
provided to make the blockchain more resilient, raising the
number of nodes to be compromised for a successful attack.
Regarding Strategy 3, we point out that actuators cannot be
directly attacked due to their blindness. Hence, the attacker
should necessarily pass through the blockchain.
C. Threat Model Discussion
In this section, we discuss strengths, limits and variations
to our threat model.
First, we note that our setting is a permissioned one,
i.e., nodes authenticate each other. For this reason, many
of the attacks that are traditionally known to be critical for
unpermissioned blockchains (like Eclipse and Sybil attacks)
cannot be performed. Another possible source of concern is the

vulnerability of the blockchain implementation itself. Usually,
this mostly regards the exploitation of a wrongly realized
RPC API of the node that a malicious client can leverage
to compromise it and possibly propagate the attack through
neighbours. First, note that in our threat model the attacker
cannot directly provide input to a node unless it has already
successfully attacked an IDS. Second, the risk of propagation
can be mitigated by having nodes with heterogeneous realization flavours for the node software, for example, having one
flavour dedicated to only edge nodes and a different flavour
dedicated to the rest of the nodes. In this way, the attacker
can compromise only one edge node and cannot use the same
exploitation technique to subvert the rest of the network.
Particular care should be taken to dimension autonomic
manager nodes, and/or limit requests, so that available resources are enough to sustain the transaction workload.
Our architecture is not resilient to attacks that can act on
containers and communications from the host. In fact, in that
case, an attacker can perform several kinds of attacks. For
example, it can shutdown IDSs to interrupt inputs to the autonomic, while shutting down actuators makes the autonomic
manager ineffective. The same effects can be obtained by interrupting the corresponding communication channels. Further,
consensus manipulation could be performed by shutting down
nodes or tampering with at least 1/3 of the nodes.
On the contrary, our architecture can be slightly modified
to tolerate a less stringent threat model. Suppose to deploy the
autonomic manager nodes on more than one host and suppose
that hosts are heterogeneous, which allows us to assume that
the attacker can successfully compromise only one of them.
In this case, if the fraction of nodes of the autonomic manager
deployed on the same host is less than 1/3, it is easy to prove
that our approach is still secure.
III. I MPLEMENTATION
To demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed architecture,
we implemented a prototype of the model presented in II-A.
The objective is not to showcase a complete use case, but
rather to assess feasibility. Therefore, in our prototype, we
focus solely on modeling blockchain components while mocking the interactions between the blockchain, the IDSs and the
managed system. We reserve the implementation of a complete
scenario for future work.
We realized our prototype using the Quorum blockchain
technology, which satisfies the requirements described in Section II-A. Among the consensus algorithms available in it,
we selected QBFT [7], for its resilience and security features.
Additionally, we considered RAFT [12] as an efficient benchmark, though it lacks tolerance to malicious attacks. Note that
the overall performance and scalability of the system heavily
depend on the underlying blockchain technology and the
consensus algorithm selected for implementation. However,
the objective of this work is not to deliver a production-grade
solution, but rather to analyze the methodology and assess
the validity of the proposed idea. Indeed, other blockchain
technologies with efficient Byzantine fault-tolerant consensus

mechanisms (e.g., Algorand [13]) exist and should be explored. We leave their evaluation for future work.
In our experimentation [6], the smart contract is written in
Solidity, a well-known de-facto standard for smart contract
development. It keeps a key-value store for the representation
of the monitored system state called parameter-status map.
The parameter-status map stores as key an identifier of the state
variable of the state, and as value the current value declared
by the majority of monitoring nodes in the system. The smart
contract also represents the response logic with a state-action
map. It stores as key a representation of a system state, and as
value the action required to protect the system found to be in
that state. Note that, the state-action map might contain a huge
number of different states, as they represent permutations of
the status parameters. Such a map cannot be written directly
into the contract at the time of the deployment, as this would
exceed the maximum size allowed for a single transaction.
This limit may differ slightly between different blockchain
technologies. To solve this problem, a map population function
was implemented, which can only be invoked by the owner of
the contract (i.e., the node that deployed it).
The smart contract allows the IDSs to update its state by
means of a function named proposeNewValues. The IDS that
detects the change of a state variable invokes the function
proposeNewValues by issuing a suitable blockchain transaction, passing the list of modified state variables along with
their new values. Each invocation of this function keeps track
of the proposed values and, for each of them, checks if
that value is proposed by a majority of the IDSs observing
that state variable. If this is the case, the function updates
the representation of the monitored system state and checks
whether the new state requires an action, using the state-action
map. If an action is required, an actuator node is arbitrarily
selected. We use the event/emit construct of Solidity to push
the event to the selected actuator.
All the blockchain nodes are modeled as containers using
the Kathará [14] network emulator.
IV. E VALUATION
The evaluation of the effectiveness of a SPS involves
assessing its two main macro-components: Intrusion Detection
and Intrusion Response. While the former benefits from an established evaluation methodology—typically based on ground
truth data from purpose-built datasets—the latter remains more
challenging to assess. Indeed, an Intrusion Response System
cannot be reliably evaluated using datasets alone, as each
response action taken to protect the system can alter its
subsequent behavior, rendering any predefined attack trace
obsolete. This challenge is addressed in [15], which proposes
a methodological framework for the empirical evaluation of
SPSs. Specifically, the work highlights the importance of a
formal definition of security policy and introduces a set of
metrics to assess SPS quality. These include the duration of
an attack, the time required for detection and response, and the
cost associated with the response. The overall effectiveness of

Q1. How many transactions can the system process?
Q2. How does handling the smart contract affect latency?
Q3. How does the transaction size impact latency?
Q4. How does the state-action map size impact throughput?
Testing Environment. In order to run the experiments, we
developed a system based on the Kathará network emulator
to generate and configure network scenarios using parameters
to control different dimensions (e.g., the number of validators,
the number of actuators, the transactions per second), while
tracing the results. In all the experiments, the blockchain is
composed of three Validators (nodes that participate in the
consensus protocol), and eight Members (nodes that do not
participate in the consensus protocol), five acting as monitoring agents and three as actuators. In the QBFT consensus,
the leader node, i.e., the one that proposes the next block, is
chosen using a Round-Robin strategy. In the RAFT consensus,
the leader remains unchanged throughout the experiment. All
the nodes are directly connected. The system monitors 25
state parameters and the time between consecutive blocks
(blocktime) is set to 1 second. The choice of these parameters
has been made to represent a simplified scenario, suitable
for studying the feasibility. It is not intended to suggest
that these values are optimal or appropriate for real-world
scenarios, for which detailed analysis is required and left
to future work. To analyze how the smart contract and the
state-action map impact performance, we run the experiments
using four different systems configurations: (i) a system,
based on RAFT consensus, that only performs cryptocurrency
transfer transactions that do not involve running the IRS
smart contract (baseline-raft in the following); (ii) an
IRS, as described in Section III, with an action map of 1 K
entries based on RAFT consensus (contract-raft in the
following); (iii) a system, based on QBFT consensus, that
only performs cryptocurrency transfer transactions that do not
involve running the IRS smart contract (baseline-qbft
in the following); (iv) an IRS, as described in Section III,
with an action map of 1 K entries based on QBFT consensus
(contract-qbft in the following). All the experiments are
repeated 5 times, tracing each system’s performance for 40
seconds. Average and confidence intervals are shown in the
figures. To ensure fair and consistent results across different
runs and consensus algorithms, we limit each validator to a
single CPU. Future work will explore the scalability of the
architecture in terms of available resources per node and the
number of nodes participating in the blockchain.
Testbed. The experiments are performed on a single virtual

machine configured with 24 cores and 64 GB of RAM running
Ubuntu 24.10 as the guest operating system. The underlying
physical machine was equipped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold
6126 CPU @ 2.60GHz and 1 TB of RAM.
Reproducibility. We publicly release the code needed to
reproduce all the experiments. All the materials related to the
paper are available at [6].
600
Served Transactions per Second

an SPS is then measured in terms of the performance gap it
can achieve relative to manual protection.
In this work, our focus is not on securing a specific system,
but rather on proposing an SPS architecture that is inherently
resilient to cyber-attacks. Consequently, our evaluation considers performance metrics that directly influence attack duration,
detection time, and response time. In particular, we evaluate
the prototype presented in Section III, addressing the following
questions.

baseline-raft
contract-raft
baseline-qbft
contract-qbft

500
400
300
200
100
0
1

100
200
300
400
500
Emitted Transactions per Second

600

Fig. 2: Served transactions rate over emitted transactions rate.
Q1: Up to 500 transactions per second on a single CPU.
To determine the maximum transaction throughput supported
by the system, we measure the rate of successfully processed
transactions while increasing the rate of incoming transactions.
Figure 2 illustrates the number of served transactions per
second (y-axis) as a function of the emitted transactions per
second (x-axis). Each transaction changes a single value of
the state parameters. Both baseline systems, which handle
standard cryptocurrency transfer transactions, can sustain the
input throughput across all scenarios. In contrast, the IRS
systems must process smart contracts, increasing the computational overhead and impacting throughput. Specifically, the
contract-qbft system can sustain up to 450 tx/s, and, for
higher rates, it starts performing worse than baseline systems.
Notably, this is only slightly lower than the contract-raft
system (∼ 500 tx/s), which, however, lacks resilience to
Byzantine faults. Nevertheless, considering that this throughput represents the number of alerts from IDSs that the system
can handle, a rate of 450 tx/s is sufficient for many use cases.
Q2: Minimal latency in contract handling under low load
conditions. To understand the latency overhead introduced by
the contract and how the input transaction throughput affects
the latency, we measure the latency of served transactions,
from submission to acceptance in a block, while increasing the
rate of the emitted ones. Figure 3 shows the average latency of
served transactions in seconds (y-axis) while varying the emitted transactions per second (x-axis). Each transaction changes
the value of a single state parameter. In all the scenarios,
the average transaction latencies tend to be a multiple of the
blocktime that in our experiment is set to one second. We

5
4
3
2
1
0

1

100
200
300
400
500
Emitted Transactions per Second

600

Fig. 3: Served transactions latency over emitted transactions
rate.

note that the adoption of QBFT has the effect to step up the
latency of about one blocktime. However, the latency remains
roughly constant until the emitted transaction rate is below
the maximum throughput (which for us is about 400 tx/s).
Beyond this point, the blockchain transaction pool starts to
grow, causing some transactions to remain in the pool for
multiple block rounds, thereby increasing the average latency.
However, we note that, until the system is able to maintain the
input throughput, a latency of two seconds may be considered
acceptable in most situations.
3.0
contract-raft
contract-qbft

Transaction Latency (s)

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

1

5

10
15
Transactions size

20

contract-raft
contract-qbft

500

25

Fig. 4: Served transactions latency while increasing
transactions size.
Q3: Increasing transaction size has a minimal impact on
latency. To evaluate the impact of the transaction size (i.e.,
the number of state parameters modified by a transaction)
on latency, we measure transaction finalization times while
gradually increasing their size. In this experiment, we omit
the baseline, as transaction size is not a meaningful concept in

Served Transactions per Second

Transaction Latency (s)

that context. All the experiments are conducted at a fixed rate
of one transaction per second. Figure 4 illustrates the average
latency of processed transactions (y-axis) as the transaction
size varies (x-axis). The results indicate that the latency
remains largely stable as the transaction size increases for both
consensus mechanisms. As expected from previous findings,
the contract-qbft system incurs slightly higher overhead compared to contract-raft. This stability enables
monitoring nodes to send IDS alerts in batches, effectively
increasing the number of alerts the system can handle per
second. As future work, we plan to analyze the impact of
transaction size at higher rates to determine the optimal tradeoff for specific use cases.

baseline-raft
contract-raft
baseline-qbft
contract-qbft

6

400

300

200

100

0
1

100
200
300
400
500
Emitted Transactions per Second

600

Fig. 5: 100 K state-action map: served transactions rate over
emitted transactions rate.
Q4: Slightly decrease under high load conditions as the
state-action map size increases. As an additional test, we
repeated the experiments from Q1 using different state-action
map sizes. Specifically, we increased the map size up to 100 K
entries, verifying that the overall results remained consistent
with previous experiments. Figure 5 presents the results for a
map size of 100 K. While the contract-raft line shows
no significant degradation, the contract-qbft line exhibits
a slight performance decline as the transaction rate increases.
However, under normal load conditions, the map size does
not impact the rate, demonstrating that the system effectively
supports larger state sizes.
V. R ELATED W ORK
In the field of Self-Managing Systems and, in particular, of
SPS, only few works addressed the problem of protecting the
autonomic manager. A broad classification of attack vectors
to self-adapting systems is provided in [16], indicating that
the majority of the attacks are due to the manipulation of system resources, deceptive interactions, injection of unexpected
items, subversion of access control, collection and analysis of
the information, and abuse of existing functionality. However,
the need for targeted security mechanisms was raised nearly 10

years before, as reported in [3], where the authors emphasize
the importance of investigating on how to protect the protector,
that is, how to safeguard the meta-level self-protection module,
especially in a globally decentralized topology.
Trustworthiness is widely recognized as a fundamental
property to build secure, robust and dependable autonomous
systems. A taxonomy of trustworthy autonomous systems is
presented in [4], where the authors introduce the concept of
cyber-resilience as an extension to cyber-security, focusing on
the strategies and on the policies that should be adopted to
support a self-adapting system despite unexpected operating
conditions, which may include cyber-attacks. One possible
implementation of a cyber-resilient system is described in [17],
where the design of a trustworthy self-adaptive software is
based on assurance cases, allowing the formal verification of
properties, however without providing a specific, secure by
design perspective on how to realize an autonomic manager.
For this reason, this work can be considered complementary to
ours, and in particular, the formal verification of system properties through assurance cases could be seen as an extension
to be applied on top of the approach proposed in this work.
In [18], the architectural design of a self-protecting IoT
system leveraging blockchain to guarantee the trustworthiness
of the adaptation is presented. The blockchain is used to store
details about the participating agents, e.g., public keys, MAC
addresses, along with their beliefs regarding the system state
and the corresponding action that must be executed. This work
introduces a system design that is conceptually similar to
what we propose in this paper. However, a prototype is not
available and a threat model is not discussed, which makes
the limitations of the proposed approach unclear.
Finally, there exist technologies that are somewhat related
to the aims of our work. The Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
is a hardware-based technology that is used to provide some
form of platform integrity. The TPM is normally used to
check that the boot process involves only software from trusted
sources. This is not useful in our case, in which the attacker
might compromise the system while it is running. A Trusted
Execution Environment (TEE), sometimes also called secure
enclave, is a hardware-based execution environment that is
isolated from the rest of the system and protects sensitive
computations from attacks to the system. This is essentially the
same function played by the container isolation requirement
in our threat model. The software that runs in the TEE may
be attacked by usual means, in the sense that a vulnerability
of the software that runs in the TEE can be exploited as usual.
However, certain TEEs (e.g., Intel SGX) can perform remote
attestation, providing a remote client with proof that the code
running in the TEE is untampered. Usually, a TEE is used to
run small specific software, and it may be unfeasible to run a
whole autonomic manager within a TEE. A third technological
option to consider is the adoption of an architecture similar the
one proposed in Section II-A but with a consensus protocol
used without the machinery related to the blockchain. Actually,
the history-recording feature of the blockchain is not very
relevant in our approach. On the contrary, the fact that the

transactions are processed in blocks is relevant to achieving
a high throughput. Hence, a solution adopting pure consensus
will end up to be quite similar to a blockchain without history
records.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, a novel architecture for cyber-resilient SPSs
was proposed. We discussed the architectural model and
the threat model, clarifying the potential limitations of the
proposed approach. Experimental results show that while there
are inherent scalability issues with the blockchain, the rate of
events that can be sustained by the autonomic manager is high
enough for most production systems.
As part of future work, we intend to extend the experimental evaluation to other consensus algorithms and blockchain
technologies. Moreover, we plan to study the scalability issues
related to the serialization of the alerts and devise a blockchain
that can process transactions in parallel if there is an empty
intersection of the variables involved in the state change. Finally, we plan on evaluating the performance of the autonomic
manager while scaling the number of IDSs and blockchain
nodes, possibly considering known approaches for blockchain
scalability, e.g., the one described in [19].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by project SERICS
(PE00000014) under the MUR National Recovery and Resilience Plan funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU; by the PRIN 2022 project 2022Y45XE3 Panacea: A
Model-Based Framework for Self-Protecting Systems funded
by Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca (MUR); and by
Progetto Integrato 2.1 “Cyber Security dei sistemi energetici”
PTR22-24 funded by Ministero dell’Ambiente e della Sicurezza Energetica (MASE).
R EFERENCES
[1] J. O. Kephart and D. M. Chess, “The vision of autonomic computing,”
Computer, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 41–50, 2003.
[2] D. M. Chess, C. C. Palmer, and S. R. White, “Security in an autonomic
computing environment,” IBM Systems journal, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 107–
118, 2003.
[3] E. Yuan, N. Esfahani, and S. Malek, “A systematic survey of selfprotecting software systems,” ACM Transactions on Autonomous and
Adaptive Systems (TAAS), vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1–41, 2014.
[4] F. Flammini, C. Alcaraz, E. Bellini, S. Marrone, J. Lopez, and A. Bondavalli, “Towards trustworthy autonomous systems: Taxonomies and future perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
2022.
[5] X. Wang, S. Duan, J. Clavin, and H. Zhang, “Bft in blockchains: From
protocols to use cases,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no.
10s, pp. 1–37, 2022.
[6] T. Caiazzi, D. Pennino, V. Marini, S. Iannucci, M. Pizzonia,
and R. Torlone, “irs-blockchain-gitlab,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://gitlab.com/uniroma3/compunet/networks/irs-blockchain
[7] “Qbft — consensys goquorum,” 11 2023, [Online; accessed
2025-02-26]. [Online]. Available: https://docs.goquorum.consensys.
io/configure-and-manage/configure/consensus-protocols/qbft
[8] S. Iannucci, S. Abdelwahed, A. Montemaggio, M. Hannis, L. Leonard,
J. S. King, and J. A. Hamilton, “A model-integrated approach to
designing self-protecting systems,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 1380–1392, 2018.
[9] V. Buterin et al., “Ethereum white paper,” GitHub repository, vol. 1, pp.
22–23, 2013.

[10] N. Atzei, M. Bartoletti, and T. Cimoli, “A survey of attacks on ethereum
smart contracts (sok),” in International conference on principles of
security and trust. Springer, 2017, pp. 164–186.
[11] S. S. Kushwaha, S. Joshi, D. Singh, M. Kaur, and H.-N. Lee, “Systematic
review of security vulnerabilities in ethereum blockchain smart contract,”
Ieee Access, vol. 10, pp. 6605–6621, 2022.
[12] Quorum, “Raft consensus overview - quorum.” [Online]. Available:
https://goquorum.readthedocs.io/Consensus/raft/raft/
[13] Y. Gilad, R. Hemo, S. Micali, G. Vlachos, and N. Zeldovich, “Algorand:
Scaling byzantine agreements for cryptocurrencies,” in Proceedings of
the 26th symposium on operating systems principles, 2017, pp. 51–68.
[14] M. Scazzariello, L. Ariemma, and T. Caiazzi, “Kathará: A Lightweight
Network Emulation System,” in NOMS 2020 - 2020 IEEE/IFIP Network
Operations and Management Symposium, 2020.
[15] A. Montemaggio, S. Iannucci, T. Bhowmik, and J. Hamilton, “Designing a methodological framework for the empirical evaluation of selfprotecting systems,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Systems Companion (ACSOS-C).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 218–223.
[16] I. Pekaric, R. Groner, T. Witte, J. G. Adigun, A. Raschke, M. Felderer,
and M. Tichy, “A systematic review on security and safety of selfadaptive systems,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 203, p. 111716,
2023.
[17] R. Calinescu, D. Weyns, S. Gerasimou, M. U. Iftikhar, I. Habli, and
T. Kelly, “Engineering trustworthy self-adaptive software with dynamic
assurance cases,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 44,
no. 11, pp. 1039–1069, 2017.
[18] F. Alkhabbas, M. Alsadi, S. Alawadi, F. M. Awaysheh, V. R. Kebande, and M. T. Moghaddam, “Assert: A blockchain-based architectural
approach for engineering secure self-adaptive iot systems,” Sensors,
vol. 22, no. 18, p. 6842, 2022.
[19] G. D. Monte, D. Pennino, and M. Pizzonia, “Scaling blockchains
without giving up decentralization and security: A solution to the
blockchain scalability trilemma,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains for Distributed Systems, 2020, pp.
71–76.

